---
layout: post
title: What's Jekyll?
---

The field of comics studies is often criticized for its canonization of primarily white (and frequently male) artists. Rutgers University Press's recent publication of Comics Studies: A Guidebook edited by Charles Hatfield and Bart Beaty was criticized for its dependence on almost exclusively white male contributors. The most widely cited cartoonists in university press publications continue to be white men like Art Spiegelman, Chris Ware, Charles Burns, Scott McCloud, as well as a few white women such as Alison Bechdel and Lynda Barry. Exceptions to this trend such as Ebony Flowers, Kyle Baker, and Marjane Satrapi are rare. If, however, we can transform the means of discovering comics, perhaps we can achieve a more democratic repertoire of comics available for study. 

Instagram continues to serve as a home for cartoonists to practice their craft, share their work, and even sell prints to make ends meet. Although many published authors also maintain their online presence through the site, it is also an important resource for cartoonists who cannot break into the strongholds of publishers who are skeptical of the financial return they will receive by publishing comics. Some of the most popular cartoonists sharing comics in English on Instagram are members of the LGBTQ community, are women of color, or live outside the United States, including Reza Farazmand, Cassandra Calin, Sailesh Gopalan, Sophie Labelle, and Jenn St-Onge to name a few.

Hillary Chute's recent article "Can Comics Save Your Life?" addresses the importance of Instagram as a space for the distribution of comics, specifically during the most isolating months of the Covid-19 lockdown. Prof. Chute illustrates the impact of the "Rescue Party" competition hosted by New York publisher Desert Island Comics, which encouraged Instagram artists to submit 9-panel cartoons around the theme of quarantine. Those comics that were picked were then shared on the publisher's Instagram page for all to see. The initiative was wildly popular and allowed artists that were chosen to receive a significant boost in their page's visibility. 

The problem with this initiative, however, is that its gate-keepers continue to be publishers. If a person unfamiliar with Instagram cartoons discovers the Rescue Party competition and follows only those who are selected by Desert Island Comics, they are perpetuating the same canon cultivated in print. Because this space of conflict exists entirely in a digital platform, designing a solution is a task for the digital humanities.

What I propose, therefore, is a new method of enhancing the discoverability of cartoons using data publicly available on Instagram. Over the course of this semester and onward, I would like to create an interactive database of Instagram cartoonists. The more data that is acquired about each of the included pages, the more control users have to decide how certain artists become visible. At the moment, Instagram's mysterious algorithms are responsible for the pages that are suggested to users. A database like this could be linked directly to Instagram pages and allow users to consciously decide how they would like to choose new artists to follow.

Useful categories for sorting through accounts would include the page's number of followers, the name and origin country of the artist (if this information is available), as well as some way of indicating content. Such indicators might usefully borrow an artist's most frequently employed hashtags, such as #lgbtq, #mentalhealth, or #comedy. Although these categories can be difficult to define, an alternative option like "other" could also be available.

Because there are too many millions of accounts on Instagram to comb through for data, the most practical way of accomplishing this database would be to limit the included accounts to those with at least 1,000 followers (less than 50% of Instagram accounts). Although this operates as another form of gatekeeping, it allows the database to work with a manageable corpus and be therefore more readily able to collect useful data about those accounts which are included. In addition, this gate is not ordained by personal biases like the boundaries which exclude comics from publishers. Every Instagram account wields the ability to increase its follower count. The amount is typically a reflection of an artist's frequency of posting, the amount of time they've been on Instagram, and the quality and popularity of their work. 

Although not impervious to incidental, exclusionary practices, such a resource has the potential to expand public perceptions of a "comics canon." Rather than rely on publishers like Drawn and Quarterly, Fantagraphics, and Desert Island Comics to determine which works are of superior quality and worthy of study, a compiled and organized database of Instagram cartoons would allow those interested in comics easier access to otherwise overlooked comics. Most importantly, such an effort can resist the hegemony which curates the visibility of comics and instead promote access to otherwise unheard voices.