---
layout: post
title: 2. Conceptualizing Image-Literate Computers
---

While reading James Sturm's graphic novel *Market Day*, I noticed that my pre-owned copy included pencil added by the previous reader. At first, my instinct was to erase these comments. I soon realized, however, that they weren't written in English. This made me curious enough to look up one of the written phrases which appeared to spell "tinh ban," which Google translates as the Vietnamese word for "friendship," written above the book's word "camaraderie." This made me ponder a question surely asked by many digital scholars, of whether OCR can be trained to read handwritten annotations, or irregular handwriting generally.

In one of our recent lectures, we discussed machine learning and artificial intelligence. When we design "stupid" computers to organize our data, they reveal new perspectives about the structures of text that are buried behind a distracting layer of meaning. By asking a computer to read hundreds of novels and then write its own, we can see similarities between texts that verify the conventional norms of the genre. Can the same be done for comics? If machine learning can allow computers to write novels, can they be taught to draw pictures? What can this tell us about the innate structures of comics pages?

Of course, image recognition software is very unreliable (this is why CAPTCHA works). Since we don't have the technology, if we were to *imagine* the result of a machine produced comic, what would we expect it to look like? This is a case where although we don't have access yet to the data, digital humanities can allow us to think about how else we can approach this issue. If we our dataset consists of the developing canon of comics studies, we might expect a simulation to emphasize panels, vaguely humanoid characters distinct from their backgrounds, and consistent textual overlays. 

Although we can likely teach a computer to approximately replicate data it is fed, how far can we imagine the future of image recognition? Could an algorithm be designed to detect stolen material from other artists? Then, of course, who would be notified and who has the authority to remove content? And could such technology be sensitive enough to detect similarities that aren't exact copies?

The infinite variability of Penrose tiling might offer the key to theorizing image recognition. Penrose tiling is a design theory in which "tiles" of limited shapes are mathematically arranged to cover an infinite plane with infinite, non-repeating patterns. 
 
If a computer can be taught to recognized patterns of tiling because of their mathematical properties despite their infinite variation, perhaps they can be taught to recognize the mathematical similarities of similar but non-identical drawings. The potential motifs we can expect an image-trained computer to recreate show us that images apply rules and repeated structures not unlike those visible in traditional novels. If we compare these to the rules which dictate Penrose tiling, we can see historical precedent of a mathematically-derived sequence of infinite, distinct images. If a computer can be taught to recognize segments of Penrose tiling, perhaps this logic can train them to read images.